---
layout: post
title: Mastering "M" in "MEAN" full-stack javascript (2)
---

*MEAN* full-stack javascript is popular in today's web application development. It is
short for four javascript-based web technologies:

- *M*: mongoDB -- NoSQL database
- *E*: Express.js -- node.js web application framework
- *A*: AngularJS -- front-end web framework
- *N*: Node.js -- a platform built on Chrome's JavaScript runtime

This series of articles are aimed to list some critical concepts, foundamentals and my
preliminary understanding of this *M*.

---

**Key Words**: CRUD, User Authentication, http request, POST

When we have some foundation about mongodb or mongoose, like what are mongoose schema, model and
document? What are schema properities and custom methods? How to export schemas as mngoose models?
What kind of data types supported by mongoodb and mongoose? What does the array in mongoose looks like?
As well as what are ObjectID and `_id` property? Then we could move on to explore the mongoose data
manipulation methods, namely the so-called CRUD operations:

- C: Create
- R: Read
- U: Update
- D: Delete

From this article, we are going to cover the above four operations blog by blog.

I think the best way to learn any method or technique is case study. So I am about to introduce
some code snippets in my current project to illustrate the critial concepts and usages.

As Simon said in his mongoose book "Mongoose for Application Development",
> As we are building an application from the ground up, our first work with data will
be creating some and saving it to the database.

The most popular case is so-called "user authentication" or called "user registration".
When we build a web application, for example, facebook, we would like store user's information,
different users use different usernames and paswords to login. Thus, we require our web app
could help us store user's username and password (and some other information). Such data persistence
work is shouldered by our back-end database.

First by first, we should create a user schema like this:

```javascript
...
var UserSchema = new Schema({

    username: { type: String, required: true, index:{unique: true} },
    firstName: { type: String, required: true },
    lastName: { type: String, required: true },
    email: { type: String, required: true, index:{unique: true} }, // email syntax of new user should be validated.
    password: { type: String, required: true, select: false },
    company: { type: String },
    phone: {type: String },
    createdOn: { type: Date, default: Date.now },
    lastSignon: { type: Date, default: Date.now},
});

module.exports = mongoose.model('User', UserSchema);
```
In the above schema, there are some statements may look unfamiliar, like `required: true` and `select: false`.
They are called property "modifier" which is used for value invalidating. Actually, there exists many such modifiers in
mongoose, all of which are not hard to understand. How to master them? Pratice! Pratice! Pratice!

Creating a schema does not mean we are done. We should assign these properties with real data.

To explain this, I'd like to cite a use case about http POST request. Code snippet first:

```javascript
var auth = express.Router();

auth.post('/signup', function(req, res){
    var user = new User({
        username: req.body.username,
        email: req.body.email,
        password: req.body.password,
        firstName: req.body.firstName,
        lastName: req.body.lastName,
    });

    user.save(function(err){
        if(err){
            res.send(err);
            return;
        }
        res.json({
          success: true,
          message: "new user created"
        });
    });
});
```
The above piece of code is a typical (simplified) user signup end point.
It means when user type the URL `https://.../signup` to his browser, the web
app will execute the operations provided by `,function(req, res)`.

Here `req` mean "http request", `res` means "http response". So now questions coming: "what are http requests and responses?"

Imagine when you register facevbook or twitter, you will first click on a button called `Sign up`, then facebook will provide you
some forms and ask to fill your usename, password and some other infomation. Your click on the button is regarded as a http request,
such request is called "GET" request, which you ask the facebook server/database to give you this form to sigin up. For a "GET" request,
we do not required to provide any information (i.e, we do not need to type anything). The webpage offering you some forms is the response
from facebook back end server.

Next, we will fill the forms with you username, etc and then click on `Submit`, and facebook tells you: "Congratuations!You are now a facebooker!"
This time, you provide some information, your click is still a http request, but it is not "GET" request. It is a "POST" request.
It means you post some information to facebook. Here what you see is "Congratuations!..." but what you do not see is your information is
already stored in facebook database. At this time, facebook's response is actually including the data storage and "Congratuations!...", the two
components.

Let's go back to the above snippet, the information, username, password, etc are all stored in your request body temporarily. Then facebook read
them one by one via executing the statements like "username: req.body.username,", when all data is read, a new facebook user `user` is created in the database with unique username and password, etc.

Next time, as long as we query username, we can easy find our account information. Easy enough?
