---
layout: post
title: Django Framework Installation
---

This blog will cover the following contents:

>- python in Linux
>- django installation
>- django sqlite3 DB
>- github version control 

Before we set out to use django framework for the web app development, we would like to first set up the development environment, including programming language (python), django framework as well as the database (default sqlite3, mysql, oracle, etc).

#Python#

If you are using some linux distribution (i.e, Ubuntu, Redhat, etc), then python is already
pre-installed in the OS. To check whether or not python works well in your OS, you could simply type command 


```
$ python
```

if the so-called python interactive interpreter shows up, then your python is working well.

To check current python version, use the following command (be careful of the capital, the linux commmands are case sensetive):

```
$ python -V
```

or

```
$ python --version
```


##Django##

There are several ways to install django. As for me, tool **pip** is the most straight forward way under linux (my OS is Ubuntu 14.04) environment. Obviously, we should install pip first.


```
$ sudo apt-get install python-pip 
```

When pip is installed, we could use the following command:

```
$ sudo pip install Django==1.4 
```

Here I am installing django version 1.4, feel free to use any valid version id here. 

After some automatical processing, django is intalled successfully. If you want to check the django version, open a Python console and type

```
import django
django.VERSION
```
